[DOCS] Modernize and streamline Composer migration instructions (#355)
TYPO3-Documentation/TYPO3CMS-Guide-Installation: Documentation/MigrateToComposer/MigrationSteps.rst

    *   `Introduction to Composer <https://getcomposer.org/doc/00-intro.md>`__
    *   `Basic usage of Composer <https://getcomposer.org/doc/01-basic-usage.md>`__

Delete files
============

Yes, that's true. You have to delete some files, because they will be created by
Composer in some of the next steps.

> You have to delete :file:`public/index.php`, :file:`public/typo3/` and all the

Reviewer: As always, we should add an admonition, that a backup should be done before.

    *   `Basic usage of Composer <https://getcomposer.org/doc/01-basic-usage.md>`__

> It is recommended to perform a Composer migration using the latest TYPO3 Major release to prevent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is recommended to perform a Composer migration using the latest TYPO3 major release to prevent
```

facing bugs and issues that have been solved already in newer versions. In case you
are using an older TYPO3 version in Legacy installation mode, you have two viable options:

*   **Upgrade TYPO3 Legacy first**, then do the migration to Composer. This is probably

>     easiest, as you can follow the :ref:`Legacy Upgrade guide <legacy>`, and then this guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    easiest, as you can follow the :ref:`Legacy Upgrade Guide <legacy>`, and then this guide.
```

>     easiest, as you can follow the :ref:`Legacy Upgrade Guide <legacy>`, and then this guide.

Reviewer: I suggest to avoid "easiest". We want to get rid of "easy", "simple" etc, as it is mostly not easy. And upgrading a legacy installation is mostly not easy.

Author: Well, between the two ways this is certainly "easiest", because the other way involves a TYPO3 major update.

I understand your intention. I rephrased it to "straight-forward". I don't think one way or the other can really be recommended here. I personally would perform the upgrade in one go, but I removed that due to the feedback from you. Which route which you recommend? How would you rephrase it?

> *   **Migrate old TYPO3 version to Composer first**, then perform the :ref:`Major Upgrade <major>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   **Migrate old TYPO3 version to Composer first**, then perform the :ref:`major upgrade <major>`.
```

    This might cause some friction, because you have to utilize older versions of
    `typo3/cms-composer-installers` and dependencies like `helhum/typo3-console` or outdated
    extensions on Packagist.

>     You will also need to inspect older versions of this Guide that matches your old TYPO3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You will also need to inspect older versions of this guide that matches your old TYPO3
```

    version, using the version selector of the documentation.

Delete files
============

.. include:: Backup.rst.txt

Yes, that's true. You have to delete some files, because they will be created by
Composer in some of the next steps.

You have to delete :file:`public/index.php`, :file:`public/typo3/` and all the

> extensions inside :file:`public/typo3conf/ext/` you downloaded from TER or any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extensions inside :file:`public/typo3conf/ext/` that you have downloaded from TER or any
```

> extensions inside :file:`public/typo3conf/ext/` that you have downloaded from TER or any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extensions inside :file:`public/typo3conf/ext/` that you have downloaded from the TYPO3 Extension Repository (TER) or any
```

need, so be sure to update the required extensions as described in the next
sections.

> You can also create the :file:`composer.json` file via a :bash:`composer init` command.

Reviewer: Please link the "composer.json" in line 34 with https://docs.typo3.org/m/typo3/reference-coreapi/12.4/en-us/ExtensionArchitecture/FileStructure/ComposerJson.html for more information.

Or use the `TYPO3 Composer helper <https://get.typo3.org/misc/composer/helper>`__.
Also advanced project builders like `CPS-IT project-builder <https://github.com/CPS-IT/project-builder>`__
help you to easily initialize this most vital file of a Composer project.

.. hint::

>    Versions prior to TYPO3 v12 may reference a `scripts` section that would make use of

Reviewer: I don't understand that. When coming from a legacy installation, where is that "scripts" section before?

Or do you mean the base-distribution?

   `helhum/typo3-console <https://packagist.org/packages/helhum/typo3-console>`__, and which
   also would need to be required as a package in your newly created :file:`composer.json`.

>    You can look at previous versions of the :file:`composer.json` in the mentioned repository,

Reviewer: Which repository?

>    if you want to migrate an older TYPO3 version to Composer.

Reviewer: We should not recommend that. First: change to composer then upgrade or vice versa. Not all at once.

>    It is recommended to perform a Composer migration with the latest TYPO3 release to prevent

Reviewer: Hmm, why? which issues?

Reviewer: Ack.

   facing issues that have been solved already in newer versions.

Add all required packages to your project
=========================================

> ..  note::

Reviewer: I would remove that note: the "typo3-ter" is deprecated it should not be used nowadays. Period.

explicitly built for your current project and does not have an own Git
repository.

Configure Composer
==================

Create a file with name :ref:`composer.json <t3coreapi:files-composer-json>`
in your project root, not inside your web root.

> You can use the :file:`composer.json` from typo3/cms-base-distribution as an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the :file:`composer.json` from `typo3/cms-base-distribution` as an
```

explicitly built for your current project and does not have an own Git
repository.

Configure Composer
==================

Create a file with name :ref:`composer.json <t3coreapi:files-composer-json>`
in your project root, not inside your web root.

You can use the :file:`composer.json` from `typo3/cms-base-distribution` as an
example. Use the file from the branch which matches your current version, for
example `12.x <https://github.com/typo3/TYPO3.CMS.BaseDistribution/tree/12.x/composer.json>`__.

However, this may require extensions you don't need or omit extensions you do
need, so be sure to update the required extensions as described in the next
sections.

You can also create the :file:`composer.json` file via a :bash:`composer init` command.

> Or use the `TYPO3 Composer helper <https://get.typo3.org/misc/composer/helper>`__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Or use the `TYPO3 Composer Helper <https://get.typo3.org/misc/composer/helper>`__.
```

Also advanced project builders like `CPS-IT project-builder <https://github.com/CPS-IT/project-builder>`__
help you to easily initialize this most vital file of a Composer project.

.. hint::

>    If you see versions of the :file:`composer.json` for versions older than TYPO3 v12,

Reviewer: This sentence is hard to read. What do you want to say?

Reviewer: When you migrate a project from lgacy you don't have a composer.json file, and therefore no scripts section. Or do I miss something?

Author: That is true, but people (at least people I support) tend to frankenstein their composer.jsons) or might have the old version of this documentation. So they might see diffetent composer.jeons, and I think it would help to clear up why the old suggestion no longer is needed here.

It's not a hill I'm willing to die on, so if you say to remove it, I'll play along 😅

Reviewer: I don't get it: So, you see legacy installations with a project-level composer.json, which is obviously not in use?

Author: If I google and look at documentation and snippets in the internet, this is where I see diferrent composer.json approaches, and this is what I want to educate people on, why they might see things that they see.

   you may see references to a `scripts` section that would make use of
   `helhum/typo3-console <https://packagist.org/packages/helhum/typo3-console>`__, and which
   also would need to be required as a package in your newly created :file:`composer.json`.
   This is optional.

   You can look at previous versions of the

>    `Base-Distribution composer.json <https://github.com/typo3/TYPO3.CMS.BaseDistribution/tree/12.x/composer.json>`__,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   `Base Distribution's composer.json <https://github.com/typo3/TYPO3.CMS.BaseDistribution/tree/12.x/composer.json>`__,
```

.. code-block:: shell
   :caption: typo3_root$

   composer require "typo3/minimal:^12"

This will utilize the `Packagist <https://packagist.org>`__ repository by default,
which is the de-facto standard for any Composer package.

Composer packages usually rely on a concept called `SemVer` (semantic
versioning). This splits any version number into three parts:

*  Major version (10.x.x)
*  Minor version (x.1.x)
*  patch-level (x.x.1)

Only a major version should have intentional breaking changes (like new API,
changed configuration directives, removed functionality).

New features can only be introduced via a new minor version (unless it is breaking).

Patch-level releases only fix bugs and security issues and should never add
relevant features or even breaking changes.

By relying on this, the Composer version constraints of any installed package
allow you to continuously update involved packages with an expected outcome
(no breaking changes or non-working functionality).

There are different ways to define the version of the package you want
to install. The most common syntaxes start with `^` (e.g.

> `^9.5`) or with `~` (e.g. `~9.5.0`). A full documentation can be

Reviewer: Please update to "^12.4" and "~12.4.0"

.. code-block:: shell
   :caption: typo3_root$

   composer require "typo3/minimal:^12"

This will utilize the `Packagist <https://packagist.org>`__ repository by default,
which is the de-facto standard for any Composer package.

Composer packages usually rely on a concept called `SemVer <https://semver.org/` (semantic
versioning). This splits any version number into three parts:

*  Major version (1.x.x)
*  Minor version (x.1.x)

> *  Patch level (x.x.1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*  Patch-level (x.x.1)
```

allow you to continuously update involved packages with an expected outcome
(no breaking changes or non-working functionality).

There are different ways to define the version of the package you want
to install. The most common syntaxes start with `^` (e.g.
`^12.4`) or with `~` (e.g. `~12.4.0`). A full documentation can be
found at https://getcomposer.org/doc/articles/versions.md

In short:

*  `^12.4` or `^12.4.0` tells Composer to add newest package of
   version `12.\*` with at least `12.4.0`. When a package releases
   version `12.9.5`, you would receive that version. A version
   `13.0.1` would not be fetched. So this allows any new
   minor or patch-level version, but no new major version.

*  `~12.4.0` tells Composer to add the newest package of version
   `12.4.\*` with at least `12.4.0`, but not version `12.5.0` or `13.0.1`.
   This would only fetch newer patch-level versions of a package.

You have to decide by yourself, which syntax fits best to your needs.

This applies to both the TYPO3 Core packages as well as extension
packages, or even TYPO3-unrelated dependencies.

As a first step, you should only pick the TYPO3 Core extensions to

> ensure your setup works, and only later add third-party dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ensure your setup works, and add third-party dependencies later.
```

.. _composer-migration-require-all:
.. _composer-migration-require-subtree-packages:

Install the Core
----------------

Once the :file:`composer.json` is updated accordingly, you can

> install the system extensions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
install additional system extensions:
```

You have already the minimal package from above.

But with Composer, the **required way** is to install extensions
directly from `Packagist <https://packagist.org>`__.

This is the usual way for most extensions used today. Alternatively, some extension
authors or commercial providers offer a custom Composer repository that you can
use (see below). The usage via :bash:`composer require` remains the same.

To install any TYPO3 extension, you need to know the package name. There are multiple ways to find it:

Notice on extension's TER page
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Extension maintainers optionally can link their TYPO3 extension in TER with the
according Composer package name on `Packagist <https://packagist.org>`__. Most maintainers already did that and if you
search the extension in TER, you will see a message, which command and Composer
package name you can use to install this extension.

.. include:: /Images/ExternalScreenshots/TerComposerCommand.rst.txt

.. note::

    The command :bash:`composer req` is short for :bash:`composer require`. Both commands
    exactly do the same and are interchangeable.

Search on Packagist

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Install extensions from packagist
---------------------------------

You already know the `TER <https://extensions.typo3.org>` and always used it to install extensions? Fine.
But with Composer, the **required way** is to install extensions
directly from `packagist.org <https://packagist.org>`__.

This is the usual way for most extensions used today. Alternatively, some extension
authors or commercial providers offer a custom Composer repository that you can

> use (see below). The usage via :bash:`composer require` remains the same.

Reviewer: "See below" without a link means the reader has to scroll down and search for the content themselves. When you reference it, the reader can click on the link and don't has to search.

> use (see below). The usage via :bash:`composer require` remains the same.

Author: But where is a "see below" here? Please remove my tomatoes 😅

> use (see below). The usage via :bash:`composer require` remains the same.

Reviewer: Line 182: "use (see below)"

>    composer require mask/mask:~4.1.0

Reviewer: Please use an up-to-date version for mask.

Author: Not the scope of this PR, but I happily added it :)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In some cases, you will have to install a TYPO3 extension, which is not
available on Packagist or in the TER. Examples could be:

*  non-public extension only used by your company.
*  you forked and modified an existing extension.
*  commercial plugin / licensed download / Early Access (EAP)

As first step, you have to define the repository in your

> :file:`composer.json`'s `repositories` section. In this example, you find the

Reviewer: I am not sure that `composer.json's` is sorrectly rendered. Have you tried it? AFAIK a character directly after a backtick means that the backtick is not recognised.

Author: Haven't tried that, the code was initially like this so I didn't specifically check. Can do that later (am on mobile now)

         }
      }

>    There is no harm in having that, but it won't have any effect.

Reviewer: cms-package-dir above is outdated.

See: https://github.com/TYPO3/CmsComposerInstallers

Ideally you should not manually edit a :file:`composer.json` file, but instead
utilize the Composer command to manipulate the file, like this:

.. code-block:: shell
   :caption: typo3_root$

>    composer config repositories.foo-bar vcs https://github.com/foo/bar.git

Reviewer: The repositories are not introduced above, so why mentioning it here? This may be confusing.

Author: It's an example how to programattically adapt the "repositories" instead of editing the file. Will check if I can move it or mention more specifically why tht example is given.

A project will often contain custom extensions, and at the least a :ref:`sitepackage <t3sitepackage:start>`
that provides the TYPO3-related project templates and configuration.

Before TYPO3 v12, these extensions were stored in a directory like :file:`typo3conf/ext/my_sitepackage`.

> In Composer mode, you can easily add a custom repository within your project

Reviewer: Please remove "easily". Sometimes, for users it is not easy.

Author: ack, rephrased.

Include individual extensions like site packages
================================================

A project will often contain custom extensions, and at the least a :ref:`sitepackage <t3sitepackage:start>`
that provides the TYPO3-related project templates and configuration.

> Previously, this was stored in a directory like :file:`typo3conf/ext/my_sitepackage`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before TYPO3 v12, this extensions were stored in a directory like :file:`typo3conf/ext/my_sitepackage`.
```

Author: s/this/these/

In Composer mode, you can easily add a custom repository within your project

> of the type `path`, so that you can require your sitepackage as if it was

Reviewer: Can you improve the sentence? Maybe split into two?

a normal package. You would not need to put it into a distinct Git or remote

> Composer repository.

Reviewer: What is a "remote Composer repository"?

Author: Will rephrase to "Packagist or other custom remote repository like GitHub".

This should differentiate that you dom't need to create any remote repository, but a local one.

Usually these extensions are saved in a directory like :file:`<project_root>/packages/`
or :file:`<project_root>/extensions/` (and no longer in :file:`typo3conf/ext/`), so you would use:

.. code-block:: shell
   :caption: typo3_root$

>    composer config repositories.your-project-name path './packages/*'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   composer config repositories.local_packages path './packages/*'
```
To ease copy and paste.

   composer require myvendor/sitepackage

This also means that your sitepackage needs to be contained in its own directory like

> :file:`<project_root>/packages/my_sitepackage/` and provide the right :file:`composer.json` file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:file:`<project_root>/packages/my_sitepackage/` and provide a :file:`composer.json` file
```

within that directory. That :file:`composer.json` file would also list all the possible
autoloading information of PHP classes that your sitepackage uses:

.. code-block:: json
   :caption: EXT:my_sitepackage/composer.json

   {
        "autoload": {
            "psr-4": {
                "MyVendor\\Sitepackage\\": "Classes/"
            }
        }
   }

Directory locations are always relative to where the extension-specific :file:`composer.json` is
stored.

Do not mix up the project-specific :file:`composer.json` file with this package-specific :file:`composer.json`
file. Since autoloading information is specific to an extension, you usually do not list it in the
project file.

> Note: if you specify autoloading information in the project file, you need to specify the paths relative

Reviewer: I am not sure that we guide the user to an anti-pattern.

           {
               "type": "vcs",
               "url": "https://github.com/foo/bar.git"
           },
           {
               "type": "path",
               "url": "./packages/*"
           },
       ],
       "extra": {
           "typo3/cms": {
               "web-dir": "public"
           }
       }
   }

After adding or changing paths to the autoload you should run :bash:`composer dumpautoload`. This command
will re-generate the autoload info and should be run anytime you add new paths to the autoload portion
in the :file:`composer.json`.

After all custom extensions are moved away from :file:`typo3conf/ext/` you can remove the directory

> from your project. You may also want to adapt your :file:`.gitignore` file remove pointers to that

Reviewer: Sounds strange.

old directory.

New file locations
==================

As final steps, you should move some files because the location will have
changed for your site since moving to Composer.

> Those directories are internal files that should not be exposed to the

Reviewer: Which directories?

> Webserver, so they are moved outside the :file:`public/` structure,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
webserver, so they are moved outside the :file:`public/` structure,
```

> in parallel to `vendor/`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in parallel to :file:`vendor/`.
```

   :file:`public/typo3temp/var`, unless you need to keep the log files
   or anything else that may still be relevant.

These locations have changed, note that TYPO3 v12+ moved some more configuration
files to a new directory than TYPO3 v11:

+------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+
| Before                                               | After                                                           |
+======================================================+=================================================================+
| :file:`public/typo3conf/sites`                       | :file:`config/sites`                                            |
+------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------+

> | :file:`public/typo3temp/var`                         | :file:`var`                                                     |

Reviewer: Personally, I would remove the var and l10n folders completely, they are created again (also after fetching the translations).

   :file:`public/typo3temp/var`, unless you need to keep the log files
   or anything else that may still be relevant.

These locations have changed, note that TYPO3 v12+ moved some more configuration
files to a new directory than TYPO3 v11:

+------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| Before                                               | After                                |
+======================================================+======================================+
| :file:`public/typo3conf/sites`                       | :file:`config/sites`                 |
+------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| :file:`public/typo3temp/var`                         | :file:`var`                          |
+------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| :file:`public/typo3conf/l10n`                        | :file:`var/labels`                   |
+------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+

> | :file:`public/typo3conf/LocalConfiguration.php`      | :file:`config/system/settings.php`   |

Reviewer: Not true, when I am correct: Legacy path should be public/typo3conf/system/settings.php, same with additional.php below.

+------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| :file:`public/typo3conf/AdditionalConfiguration.php` | :file:`config/system/additional.php` |
+------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| :file:`public/typo3conf/PackageStates.php`           | removed                              |
+------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| :file:`public/typo3conf/ext`                         | removed                              |

> +------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+

Reviewer: public/typo3 is missing -> vendor/typo3/

Also _assets folder should be mentioned (which is new, maybe also link to the section in TYPO3 Explained).
